In today's lesson we'll be talking
about Symbolic permissions,
Numeric permissions,
File versus directory permissions,
how to change permissions, how to work
with groups and the File creation mask.
Here is some output from an ls -l command,
and if you look at the permission string,
the first character will indicate whether
it's a Regular file by beginning with a -,
or it will begin with
a d if it's a Directory.
Or an l, if it's a Symbolic link.
Other characters that you'll encounter
in the permissions stream include r, w,
and x.
r, w, and x represent the three
main types of permissions.
They are Read, which is r.
Write, which is w, and
Execute, which is x.
If you add Read permission to a file,
that means you can see its contents.
For example,
you could run KAT against the file and
you could see the file's contents.
If you have Write permissions to a file,
you can modify it.
You can changes its contents.
If you have Execute permissions,
you can run that file as a program.
Read, Write, and Execute are fairly self
explanatory when there applied to files.
However, they have a slightly different
meaning when they're applied to
directories.
For example, when Read permissions
are applied to a directory,
that means you can see the file
names in the directory.
If you don't have read permissions to
a directory you will not be able to see
the directory's contents.
The Write permission,
when applied to directories,
allows entries to be modified
within the directory.
So you can edit files that
are in the directory.
The Execute permission gives you
the ability to see metadata about
the files that are in the directory.
Read permissions give you the ability
to see file names whereas the Execute
permissions give you the ability
to see modification dates and
owner and group information.
Just like you would see in a ls
dash l long listing output.
There are categories of users
that these read, write, and
execute permissions can be applied to.
These categories are User,
Group, Other, and All.
And like the permission types, each
one is represented by a single letter.
For example,
u represents the User that owns the file.
The users that are in the file's
Group are represented by g.
Users that are not the owner or are not
in the file's group are considered Other.
Represented by o.
A is used to represent All, or everybody.
Every user on a Linux system
belongs to at least one group,
called their primary group.
However, users can belong to many groups.
For example, if members of the sales team
need access to some of the same files and
directories, they can be
placed into the sales group.
Run the groups command to see
what groups you're a member of,
if you supply another user's ID to
an argument to the group's command.
You'll see a list of groups
to which that user belongs.
You can also use id -Gn,
as a synonym for groups.
It will give you the same output.
In this example,
running the groups command shows that I am
in the Jason group and the sales group.
You can also see that id -Gn returns
the same value as the groups command does.
If you run the groups command followed by
another username you'll see the groups
that they are in.
For instance, Pat is in the finance and
New York groups.
The adminuser is only
in the adminuser group.
At this point you finally have enough
background information to start
decoding the permission string.
We covered that the first character is
the type, the directory, a file or a link.
The next route characters represent
the permissions available to the user
also known as the owner of the file.
The next three characters represent
the permissions available to
the members of the file's group.
The final three characters represent
the permissions available to all users.
With permissions, order has meaning.
So, permissions will always
be displayed in this order.
User, followed by Group,
and finally Others.
Also, the permission types of read,
write, and
execute are always displayed
in that order, too.
So if a particular permission is not
granted, a hyphen will take its place.
Permissions are also known as modes.
That's why the command you use to
change permissions is called chmod,
which is short for change mode.
The format of the chmod
command is chmod mode file.
And there are a couple of different
ways to specify the mode.
One is symbolic notation, and
the other is numeric notation.
To specify modes or permissions with
symbolic notation, run the chmod command.
Followed by user, group, other or all.
And an operator to add,
subtract or set permissions.
Followed by the permissions themself,
read, write or execute.
[SOUND] You can add, subtract or
set permissions using user category and
permission pairs.
So pick a category, user,
group, other or all.
Let's pick group, what we wanna do,
add, subtract or set the permission.
Let's add and add read, write, or execute.
So let's just add the write permission.
You can see that an extra W shows up in
the permissions string in
the appropriate place for group.
Can undo this by removing or
subtracting that permission.
You can also change more than
just one permission at a time.
So, you can specify the group have
write and execute permissions.
If you want to set different permissions
for different user categories,
you can separate
the specifications with a comma.
So for instance we can specify
something for the user.
Let's add read, write, execute.
And for group let's take away execute.
And you can see that that
change has taken effect.
When you specify an equals sign,
that sets the permission
to exactly what you specify, so
let's say all is set to read.
And we can see now that the owner,
or the user, the group, and
other are all set,
to just read permission.
[SOUND] Also if you don't specify
permissions after the equal sign,
all the permissions are removed.
So let's set the user read, write,
execute group to read execute.
And we'll give no permissions to others.
In addition to symbolic mode,
octal mode or
numeric mode can be used with chmod to
set file and directory permissions.
In octal mode,
permissions are based in binary.
Each permission type is treated as a bit
that is either set to off 0 or on 1.
Again, in permissions, order has meaning.
So permissions are always in read,
write, and execute order.
So r, w and x are all set to off,
the binary representation is 000.
If they're all set to on,
the binary representation is 1 1 1.
If you wanna omit the right permission,
the binary representation would be 1 0 1.
To get a number that
you can use with chmod
convert the binary representation
into base ten or decimal.
So really the shortcut here is to
remember that read equals four,
write equals two, and execute equals one.
The permissions number is determined
by adding up all the values for
each permission type.
There are eight possible values from zero
to seven, hence the name octal mode.
This graphic list all
eight possible options.
The user categories are always
in user group and other order.
So once you determine the octal value for
each category,
you specify them in that order.
So, for example, to get read,
write, execute for user.
Read and execute for group, and
just read for other, you would specify
chmod spac 754, space the file name.
Here are are the most
commonly used permissions.
So 700 ensures that a file can be read,
edited and
executed by the owner and no one else on
the system will have access to that file.
The 755 permission allows everyone
on the system to execute the file.
But only the user or
the owner of the file can edit that file.
664 allows a group of people to modify
the file and let others read it.
And 660 allows a group of people to modify
the file and not let others read it.
Mode 644 allows everyone on
the system to read the file.
But only the user or
owner of that file can edit that file.
If you're ever tempted to use seven,
seven, seven or six, six, six, for
permissions, ask yourself if
there's a better way to do that.
Because giving seven, seven,
seven permissions gives everyone on a
system full access to that file directory.
For example, if a program or a script is
set to seven, seven, seven permission,
then anyway on system can make
changes to that script or program.
Since the execute bit is set for
everyone, that program can be
executed by anyone on the system.
So if malicious code was
either inserted on purpose or
by accident,
it could cause unnecessary trouble.
If multiple people need right access
to a file, consider using groups and
limiting that access to
the members of that group.
In general, it's good to avoid seven,
seven, seven and six, six,
six permission modes.